After leaving the North Pole, Aang and the group travel to an Earth Kingdom military base to receive an escort to Omashu, so Aang can learn earthbending from King Bumi. The general there reveals a surprising plan, suggesting that Aang trigger the Avatar State to defeat the Fire Lord immediately. Meanwhile, Zuko's sister, Princess Azula claims that the Fire Lord will pardon both him and Iroh if they return home with her.
While on the way to Omashu, Aang and the crew meet a group of traveling bards who take them through a vast tunnel known as the Cave of Two Lovers. In the cave, Aang, Katara, and Appa become separated from Sokka and the bards. Elsewhere, Zuko and Iroh are sheltered by kind people after Iroh "accidentally" drinks the tea from a poisonous plant. Song, a young and compassionate healer, shows Zuko the effects of war from a normal citizen's perspective.
Aang and the crew are shocked to find Omashu captured by the Fire Nation. They sneak in and are caught by Fire Nation soldiers, but released when pox marks on Sokka create the illusion of illness. They meet the resistance and allow the whole city to escape by creating a fake epidemic with the same pox marks. While they are leaving, the Governor of Omashu's son, Tom-Tom, accidentally leaves with the earthbenders who are willing to trade him for King Bumi. Elsewhere, Azula tracks down her old friends, Mai and Ty Lee, to help her capture Zuko and Iroh.
While flying over a swamp, Aang, Katara, Sokka, and Appa become separated by a tornado. After landing in the swamp, Appa and Momo are captured. Meanwhile, Sokka sees visions of Princess Yue, Katara sees visions of her mother and Aang sees visions of an unknown girl. Elsewhere, Zuko and Iroh seek money from local villagers.
After being attacked by a band of Fire Nation soldiers, the gang stumbles upon a town celebrating Avatar Day. However, they find out that this is an "Anti-Avatar" celebration and Aang is arrested for killing Chin the Conqueror in a past life. Sokka and Katara travel to Kyoshi Island to find clues to prove Aang's innocence. Meanwhile, Zuko decides that it is best if he and Iroh split up.
Still seeking an earthbending master, Aang and the crew stumble upon an earthbending tournament. While there, they find a blind master earthbender, Toph, the girl whom Aang saw as a vision in "The Swamp". Aang challenges her and easily defeats her with airbending, but she refuses to teach him earthbending. Both Aang and Toph are captured by the owner of the earthbending tournament.
After leaving his uncle, Zuko continues his solo journey. He meets a boy in an Earth Kingdom town who brings him home to dinner. While this happens, Zuko has flashbacks about his life before banishment, involving his loving mother and cruel sister, Azula.
Aang, Katara, Sokka, and Toph are chased by an unknown machine, which results in a lack of sleep. After Toph and Katara argue, Toph leaves and runs into Iroh, who is tracking down Zuko. After cleaning Appa so his fur does not leave a trail for the tank to follow, Aang goes one way as a decoy, and Sokka and Katara fly in another direction on Appa, the former of which results in a three-way fight.
Aang tries to learn earthbending from Toph, despite interference from his previous airbending training. Sokka becomes stuck in a hole after trying to hunt an animal. Elsewhere, Iroh teaches Zuko how to redirect lightning so he will be a more capable threat against Azula.
A professor tells the gang about a Spirit Library full of information, hidden in the Si Wong Desert. Sokka decides to find the desert library in hopes of finding secrets and weaknesses about the Fire Nation. When the group arrives at the library, they find that much of the information on the Fire Nation has been destroyed; however, they still find crucial information about firebenders that could possibly end the war.
Since Appa was captured, the gang walks across the desert to tell the Earth King about the Fire Nation's secret. Aang grows angry and sad over Appa's capture. Elsewhere, a secret society helps protect Iroh and Zuko from the Fire Nation and bounty hunters.
After leaving the desert, the group, accompanied by Suki, attempts to lead a couple who are expecting a baby through the dangerous Serpent's Pass. While Zuko and Iroh are on the ferry to Ba Sing Se, they meet Jet, who is trying to turn his life around and takes an instant liking to Zuko.
Aang discovers a secret Fire Nation super weapon heading straight for Ba Sing Se and must stop it before it destroys the great wall which protects the city from invasion. Meanwhile, Jet wishes to recruit Zuko for his Freedom Fighters, but learns a dangerous secret about him instead.
Team Avatar finally arrives in the Earth Kingdom's capital, Ba Sing Se, eager to tell the Earth King about the opportunity the coming eclipse, only to be stopped by mysterious forces within the city. Meanwhile, Jet tries to prove that Zuko and Iroh, supposedly simple refugees, are actually firebenders.
During their stay in Ba Sing Se Katara and Toph have a girls' day out; Iroh helps out people in town, preparing for an emotional day; Aang helps a zookeeper build a new zoo; Sokka accidentally ends up in a poetry club; Zuko goes out on a date; Momo looks through Ba Sing Se for Appa.
After his abduction in the Si Wong Desert, Appa is eventually sold to a Fire Nation circus, where he is forced to perform. He manages to escape, but his return to Wan Shi Tong's Library proves fruitless, as Aang and his friends had already left. Flying to Ba Sing Se, he gets into a fight with a boar-q-pine, but Suki and her fellow warriors from Kyoshi Island help him recover from his injuries before the group is attacked. He flees to the Eastern Air Temple, where a mysterious guru provides him with aid on his search.
The gang continues looking for Appa, with Long Feng trying to throw them off by sending Jet to make them leave the city. They meet up with Longshot and Smellerbee and realize Jet was brainwashed. Elsewhere, Zuko discovers that Aang is in the city and begins his own search for Appa.
The gang breaks into the Earth King's palace to talk to him, Long Feng, and the Dai Li about the war. At their new house, Zuko falls spiritually ill as his latest action has set a different course for his future.
Aang starts to learn control of the Avatar State from Guru Pathik at the Eastern Air Temple. Sokka is reunited with his father and Toph teaches herself metalbending while Xin Fu and Master Yu transport Toph back to her parents. Katara and the generals plan the invasion of the Fire Nation. Later, she sees Zuko and Iroh running their tea shop.
When Aang has a vision that Katara is in danger, Aang, Sokka, and Toph all rush back to Ba Sing Se to save her. They meet up with Iroh, who asks their help in saving Zuko who had been captured as well. While Aang and Iroh journey to the prison where Zuko and Katara are held, Toph and Sokka go to warn the Earth King of a secret coup, but are captured by Azula. Aang and Katara battle Azula when Zuko shows up and helps Azula. They are overwhelmed by Zuko, Azula, and the Dai Li. Aang prepares to let go of his feelings for Katara to save her and meditates as he rises in cosmic energy but is struck by Azula's lightning bolt and falls. The gang escapes Ba Sing Se and Katara revitalizes Aang using the water from the Spirit Oasis in the North Pole.
